---
layout: post
title:  "Is having hostages futile?"
date:   2023-03-07 22:19:23 +0200
categories: Philosophy
author: "tomerlan"
---
I believe the following discussion pertains to game theory. I am not an expert on this topic, and I suspect the dilemma I shall pose or an equivalent one has been articulated before. However, who cares. This issue has been bugging me for years, particularly when encountering films featuring hostage situations.

Consider a scenario where an outlaw has taken a hostage and is surrounded by the police. The question arises: what benefit does the hostage provide to the outlaw? If he were to harm the hostage, he would have lost his only bargaining chip, and likely face severe consequences, effectively losing the game. Therefore, it may seem logical to assume that the outlaw would not harm the hostage. In this case, why are the police so concerned?

It is interesting that having additional hostages does not benefit the outlaw in this scenario. Suppose he has two hostages, shooting one of them will put him in the same losing position as he was in with just a single hostage. Therefore, the outlaw has no incentive to harm any of the hostages. This may be generalized to n hostages by induction. 

The effectiveness of having hostages lies in the fact that the police are concerned about the possibility of the outlaw acting irrationally and harming one or more of them. The presence of multiple hostages increases the likelihood that the outlaw may overlook the clear rationale that shows he is in a losing position. Paradoxically, it is the outlaw’s potential stupidity that puts him in a potentially winning position. To better his position, the outlaw should deceive the police into believing that he does not fully comprehend the situation. This tactic can create uncertainty in the minds of the police and make them more likely to negotiate with the outlaw. It is also possible, as one friend suggested, that the outlaw may choose to shoot a hostage and accept the consequences as a form of sacrifice for the benefit of future fellow outlaws. This could add an additional layer of uncertainty for negotiators in hostage situations.