---
layout: post
title:  "The terms “fake news” and “misinformation” are the modern incarnation of “heresy”"
date:   2023-02-24 00:19:23 +0200
categories: Sociaty
author: "tomerlan"
---
The phrases "fake news" and "misinformation" have become ubiquitous in recent years, used to describe opinions deemed "factually" incorrect. However, this approach to categorizing opinions is deeply flawed and leads to concerning consequences, as I shall explain. The problem arises when individuals seek to suppress opinions based on this flawed way of thinking, initiating a cultural regression back to the dark ages. 

The concept of "fake news" falsely assumes that we can decisively distinguish between truth, falsehood, and speculation. In reality, all we can assign is subjective certainty. What we call "fact" is just a strongly held belief, subjective and open to error. This does not imply that objective truth does not exist. It does exist. However, no one has direct access to it. Our beliefs are informed by our judgment, but we can still be mistaken. What people perceive as credible sources of information are often interdependent and biased. The belief that an opinion can be considered a fact because it is widely held or because a significant number of experts endorse it, is misguided, as history has demonstrated time and time over. Numerous previously widely accepted opinions are now considered false. Personal experience also supports this, for everyone can recall a time when they were passionately wrong about something. Insofar as “fact” implies certainty of truth, nothing is factual.

This is not a philosophical argument about the limitations of human knowledge a la Decartes, but a practical point with far reaching implications. By labeling certain beliefs as “facts” and their opposites “misinformation”, people are empowered to advocate for censorship as means to defend the truth and to counter the danger posed by misinformation. But it is censorship, and not free speech, that perpetuates misinformation, and in itself poses the real danger.

It is currently common for BigTech and government agencies to assign juries to decide which ideas should be censored based on their perceived "factual" status. In some cases, they would label and penalize those responsible for spreading so-called misinformation. Of course, these juries are highly susceptible to error and bias. The attempt to impose a singular official narrative through censorship harkens back to the dark ages.

The similarities between these practices and the practices of the Medieval Catholic Church are striking. The Catholic Church, during the Medieval period, maintained a powerful influence over Western Europe and had a monopoly over intellectual and religious life. The Church considered certain ideas as "heresy", which challenged its doctrine or threatened its power. To maintain its authority, the Church employed censorship, suppressing and punishing those who held or spread these ideas. They maintained lists of prohibited books and placed restrictions on their publication and circulation. The Inquisition, a tribunal organization within the Church, was established to identify and prosecute individuals who held "heretical" beliefs. The use of censorship, including book burnings, imprisonment, and execution, effectively silenced dissenting voices and reinforced the Church's dominance over intellectual thought. 

One might argue that past jurors were misguided because they didn't possess the same level or type of evidence you do to support your beliefs. However, they also considered their level of evidence to be of the highest sort, and too believed that their proofs are irrefutable. The Church relied on the works of Aristotle, then the gold standard of science, as well as religious apologetics, to support its truth claims, to rationally justify its practices, and retain power.

Proponents of censorship often overlook the possibility of a shift in power dynamics. They only support censorship as long as their beliefs align with those in control. However, if those with opposing views were to gain power and label their beliefs as misinformation, they would suddenly understand the importance of free speech. They may assume that censorship is justified if it follows certain scientific standards, but standards are subjective and the other side may also believe that it follows valid scientific standards. This highlights the danger of censorship and the need for a commitment to free speech.

It's important to recognize that everyone, including those with opposing views, may believe their arguments and methods are the best. In light of the risks posed by misinformation, it's also important to recognize that such risks are most prevalent when someone possesses the ability to both spread misinformation and suppress opposing perspectives. The most effective way to ensure truth prevails is to support open dialogue and rely on logic and evidence as its vessels, rather than censorship or retribution. This approach is not foolproof, as personal biases and persuasive language may influence the masses, but it is still preferable to allowing those in power to decide which viewpoints are heard. 